# Visualising sentence structure

## Functional terminology for sentence analysis

Slowly, in the 17th and 18th Century, a terminological amalgamation arose combining terms from Aristotelian logic with descriptive grammatical conceptualizations. The result of this mixture are the contemporary terms "subject", "object" and "predicate", which seem to be first used in the modern sense at the start of the 19th Century. The history of the emergence of these terms deserves a detailed investigation in it's own right [e.g. @forsgren1985; @forsgren1992 for the German grammatical tradition]. The following is a very short and strongly simplified overview of this terminological development. The underlying impetus for this development appears to be an ambition of grammarians to insert more "logic" into their analyses, or, in more modern terms, to create general terms for grammatical functions on top of the description of the form of linguistic elements.

Everything starts with Aristoteles. First, the term "subject", from Latin *subiectum*, itself a calque from Greek *ὑποκείμενον* 'that which lies beneath' is one of the central tenets of Aristotelian philosophy of substance. Similarly, the term "predicate" is derived from Latin *praedicatum*, which is a calque from Greek *κατηγορούμενον* 'that which is being spoken against'. These two elements, subject and predicate, are the building blocks of the Aristotelian (and medieval) logical proposition, not of a linguistic sentence. Linguistically, a Greek *λόγος* 'sentence' consists of *ὄνομᾰ* 'noun' and *ῥῆμα* 'verb'. Although Aristotle describes a third element linking the logical terms *ὑποκείμενον* 'subject' and *κατηγορούμενον* 'predicate', he does not use a specific term for this third element. Moro [-@moro2017: 35] argues that only with Abelard in the 12th Century a specific term is introduced for this link, namely the Latin term *copula*. Separataly, the term object, from Latin *objectum*, is a calque from Aristotle's *ἀντικείμενον* 'that which lies opposite'. This term does not play any role in classical logical analysis, it only figures as a philosophical concept for the observed reality.

The Latin terms *subiectum*, *praedicatum* and *copula* become a staple in medieval logic, specifically in the analysis of the syllogism. However, in the ensuing centuries, the terms "subject", "copula" or "predicate" are not used for grammatical analysis. For example, the 13th Century scholastic grammarians (the "Modists") use *suppositum* and *appositum* approximately in the sense of the Greek *ὄνομᾰ* and *ῥῆμα*, respectively [@robins1980a: 234].

In the 17th Century, the *Grammaire Générale et Raisonnée* from 1660 by Antoine Arnauld and Claude Lancelot is probably one of the first occurences of new terminology. In their attempt to link language to logic and thought, there is a first glimpse of a terminological confluence of Aristotelian logic and grammar, as the french word *sujet* ist used, although alongside *attribut* and not yet something like *predicate*:

> La connoissance de la nature du Verbe dépend de ce que nous avons dit au commencement de ce discours, que le jugement que nous faisons des choses (comme quand je dis, *la terre est ronde*) enferme necessairement deux termes; l’un appellé sujet, qui est ce dont on affirme, comme, *terre*; & l’autre appellé attribut, qui est ce qu’on affirme, comme *ronde*: Et de plus la liaison entre ces deux termes, qui est proprement l’action de notre esprit qui affirme l’attribut du sujet. [@arnauld1660: 89]
>
> 'The knowledge of the nature of the Verb depends on what we said at the beginning of this discourse, that the judgment we make about things (as when I say, *the earth is round*) necessarily includes two terms: one called subject, which is what we affirm about, such as *earth*; and the other called attribute, which is what is affirmed, such as *round*. And moreover the connection between these two terms, which is strictly the action of our mind that affirms the attribute about the subject.' [translation @kahane2020: 100]

Also in the 17th Century, Christopher Cooper in his *Grammatica Linguae Aglicanae* makes an attempt to bridge the two worlds of grammatical and logical analysis, clearly articulating the difference between the grammatical term "nominative" and the logical term "subject":

> Substantivum … Et hoc a *grammaticis* noncupatur casus nominativus, a *logicis* subjectum. … Id … vocatur praedicatum; quod si duobus verbis exprimitur, substantivum vel adjectivum subsequens copulam in regimine. [@cooper1685: 171-172]
>
> 'Noun, … grammatically it is called nominative, logically it is called subject. … It is called predicate when there are two words expressed, noun or adjective following a copula.'

In the 18th Century the use of the logical terminology for functional categories in the analysis of the sentences structure seems to be spreading. For example, in France, l'Abbé Girard in his *Les vrais principes de la language françoise* [-@girard1747: 90-92] uses the terms *Subjectif, Attributif, Objectif, Terminatif, Circonstanciel, Conjunctif* and *Adjonctif* [see also @forsgren1985: 43]. He seems to build on the *sujet/attribut* terminology from the *Grammaire Générale et Raisonnée* (see above) and extends this functional approach to other aspects of linguistic structure, notebly introducing the term "objectiv". In Germany, Johann Christoph Adelung in his *Umständliches Lehrgebäude der Deutschen Sprache* [-@adelung1782: 61] uses the terms *Subject* and *Praedicat*, but not anyting resembling the term object. In yet another example, this time from England, Joseph Priestly in his *Rudiments of English Grammar* (1772) uses the terms "subject" and "object", but he does not appear to have used the term "predicate".

> Q. What is meant by the Subject of an affirmation? 
> A. The person of thing concerning which the affirmation is made.
>
> Q. What is a verb transitive?
> A. A verb transitive, besides having a subject, implies, likewise, an object of the affirmation, upon which its meaning may, as it were, pass; and without which the sense would not be complete. [-@priestley1772: 13]

These are just a few examples of the rise of erstwhile logical terminology in the realm of grammatical description in the 18th Century. The expansion of this terminology in the 17th and 18th Century needs a more detailed investigation from whay I am able to provide here. However, by the start of the 19th Century the terms *subject*, *object*, *predicate* and *copula* all seem to have been completely accepted as regular terms for grammatical analysis. Yet, what exactly these terms are supposed to main in the realm of grammar remains up for debate (a debate that runs up to the present date). Specifically, there are two aspects of the logical origin of these terms that are crucial to interpret the grammatical literature of the 19th Century. 

(i) the balanced bond between subject and predicate [cf. the "S-P-Funktion" of @forsgren1992: 75-76] and (ii) the status of the copula [cf. the "Copula-Theorie" of @forsgren1992: 135-153].

There are some vestiges of the "old" logical tradition still found at the start of the 19th Century: subject-predicate primacy and copula-theory.